---
date-created: "2026-01-23"
tags:
  - Daily
  - Fall2025
---
^ [[Daily MOC.base|Daily MOC]]
@ [[Maps of Content MOC.base|Maps of Content MOC]]

---
# Friday, January 23, 2026
<< [[Daily Notes/01-22-2026|Yesterday]] | [[Daily Notes/01-24-2026|Tomorrow]] >>

---
## Points
### Linguistics: Roots of English
#### Dialects
- Dialect → when there is differences in a language but are still mutually intelligible
- Different dialects don’t cause trouble in understanding each other even if different words are used; they can be explained using the common understood words
- This can get messy, there is no definite line
	- __Mutual Intelligibility__ is the key
- Language vs dialect can be effected by politics or national boundaries
	- Hard to count how many languages
	- ==Just over 7,000==
#### Can a language die?
- Sure it can. Many languages become extinct; they have no more native speakers
	- Even in the Vatican, Latin is learned after their native languages 
- How would a new language be “born”?
	- Very hard to notice
		- Not noticeable until it is done
	- English was born at some point. 
#### Linguistic Sub-branches
- Phonetics
	- Articulatory
		- How speech sounds are produced by speakers
	- Acoustic
		- Nature of the sound waves produced in speech
	- Auditory
		- Perception of sound waves by hearers
- Phonology
	- Mental organization of speech sounds into building blocks
	- Phonemes and allophones
	- English /t/
		- Top, stop, cat, button
- Morphology
	- Structure of words
		- Undeniable (un ((deny) able))
		- Disprove (dis (prove))
		- Catalogue
	- Paradigms
		- Not all words follow the standard rules we set up → breaked instead of broke
		- Break
		- Breaks
		- Breaking
		- Broke
		- Broken
- Syntax
	- Structure of phrases and sentences
		- Word order
			- The big truck is far too noisy
	- Grammar changes slower than other things
	- Syntactic categories
		- __ dog chased the cat
		- What words can we put in that blank?
			- The, a, that, this…
			- These words all belong to the same syntactic category, *determiner*.
- Semantics
	- Linguistic Meaning
		- Lexical Semantics
			- The meanings of words, and their relations to one another
		- Formal Semantics
			- How meanings combine into complex ideas. A sentence is not just a bag of words
				- John likes Mary != Mary likes John
- Pragmatics
	- Study of Discourse (utterances longer than a sentences) - and the choices that we make.
	- Why this word, why this pattern…
- ==Historical Linguistics== ← This class
	- 
- Sociolinguistics
	- Language in its social context
		- Language variation
			- Age
			- Gender/identity
			- Race/ethnicity
			- Location
			- Socioeconomic class
		- Why does variation occur? What purpose does it serve?
		- Is there always variation between groups?
		- Language and Identity
- Psycholinguistics
	- What happens in your brain when you hear a sentence?
	- What happens in your brain when you create a sentence?
	- When people suffer damage to a particular portion of the brain, can we predict what impact it will have on their language? Can we repair it?
- Computational Linguistics
	- Can we write a software program that would translate poems, give advice, or make jokes, as well as a person? Maybe!
	- How do ChatGBT, Gemini, Claude and their competitors work?
	- Does Alexa understand your commands?
	- How could we design software to alert us whenever a harmful tweet is made, or a video with misinformation is published to YouTube?
- Language Acquisition
	- Practically everyone learns their first human language (L1) during the first three or so years of life. It seems incredible - after all, they are infants and we adults know how hard learning a new language can be - but it happens
	- What is it about the infant’s brain that enables it to learn so fast?
	- What conditions have to be present n the infant’s environment
	- Does L1-learning ever go wrong?
- Applied Linguistics
	- How people learn L2. What are the best methods for teaching a language? What pitfalls can be avoided? How is an L2 stored in your brain?
#### Is something special about English? Or is it a typical, average language?
- Some things __typologically__ unusual about English
	- Some possibilities
		- Sounds that a language uses
			- [ æ ] - Th**a**t, H**a**ppy 
			- [ \theta\ ] - **th**ick
			- **Th**e - th sound is rare like in the
			- [ i ] - ee; very common
		- The ways that words are assembled into sentences
		- How many words are available ("the size of the lexicon")
		- 

## Tasks
```tasks
not done
sort by due
hide backlink
```
